# Code of Conduct

This Code of Conduct covers behavior in projects managed by Open Tech
Strategies, LLC (OTS).

## Our Pledge

In the interest of fostering an open and welcoming environment, we as
contributors and maintainers pledge to making participation in our
projects and our community a harassment-free experience for everyone.

## Our Standards

Examples of behavior that contributes to creating a positive
environment include:

* Using welcoming and inclusive language

* Being respectful of differing viewpoints and experiences

* Gracefully accepting constructive criticism

* Focusing on what is best for the community

* Showing empathy towards other community members

Examples of unacceptable behavior by participants include:

* The use of sexualized language or imagery and unwelcome sexual
  attention or advances

* Trolling, insulting/derogatory comments, and personal or political
  attacks

* Public or private harassment

* Publishing others' private information, such as a physical or
  electronic address, without explicit permission

## Our Responsibilities

For the purposes of this Code of Conduct, "project maintainers" means
persons delegated by OTS partners as managing designated projects.

Project maintainers are responsible for clarifying the standards of
acceptable behavior within the projects they maintain and are expected
to take appropriate and fair corrective action in response to any
instances of unacceptable behavior.

Project maintainers have the right and responsibility to remove, edit,
or reject comments, commits, code, wiki edits, issues, and other
contributions that are not aligned to this Code of Conduct, or to ban
temporarily or permanently any contributor for other behaviors that
they deem inappropriate, threatening, offensive, or harmful.

## Scope

This Code of Conduct applies both within project spaces and in public
spaces when an individual is representing the project or its
community.  Examples of representing a project or community include
using an official project e-mail address, posting via an official
social media account, or acting as an appointed representative at an
online or offline event.  Representation of a project may be further
defined and clarified by project maintainers or by OTS partners.

## Reporting and Enforcement

Instances of abusive, harassing, or otherwise unacceptable behavior
may be reported by contacting either the appropriate project
maintainer(s) or by contacting one or more partners at Open Tech
Strategies, LLC.  Contacted parties will review, investigate, and
handle complaints in the manner that they deem appropriate to the
circumstances.  The contacted parties will maintain confidentiality
with regard to the reporter of an incident, except that a project
maintainer may involve an OTS partner in this process if the maintainer
deems it necessary.  However, if a complaint involves an OTS partner,
those handling it will maintain confidentiality with regard to that
partner.

If a complaint were to involve *all* OTS partners, there would no way
to handle it at all.  Therefore this Code of Conduct does not promise
confidentiality from OTS partners in that circumstance.

## Attribution

This Code of Conduct is adapted from the
[Contributor Covenant, version 1.4](http://contributor-covenant.org/version/1/4).
